Adjust rules for control flow (#240)
tidyverse/style: syntax.qmd

output <- capture.output(x <- f())
```

### Long function calls

Strive to limit your code to 80 characters per line. This fits comfortably on a
printed page with a reasonably sized font. If you find yourself running out of
room, this is a good indication that you should encapsulate some of the work in

> a separate function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a separate function or use early returns to reduce the nesting in your code.
```

If a function call is too long to fit on a single line, use one line each for
the function name, each argument, and the closing `)`.

> This makes the code easier to read and to change later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This style is called "expanded" and it makes the code easier to read and to change later.
```

)

# Bad
do_something_very_complicated("that", requires, many, arguments,
                              "some of which may be long"
                              )
```

As described under [Named arguments](#argument-names), you can omit the argument names
for very common arguments (i.e. for arguments that are used in almost every
invocation of the function). If this introduces a large disparity between the line lengths, you may want to supply names anyway:

```{r}
# Good
my_function(
  x,
  long_argument_name,
  extra_argument_a = 10,
  extra_argument_b = c(1, 43, 390, 210209)
)

# Also good
my_function(
  x = x,
  y = long_argument_name,
  extra_argument_a = 10,
  extra_argument_b = c(1, 43, 390, 210209)
)
```

You may place multiple unnamed arguments on the same line if they are closely
related to each other. A common example of this is creating strings
with `paste()`. In such cases, it's often beneficial to match one line of code
to one line of output.

```{r}
# Good
paste0(
  "Requirement: ", requires, "\n",
  "Result: ", result, "\n"
)

# Bad
paste0(
  "Requirement: ", requires,
  "\n", "Result: ",
  result, "\n")
```

## Braced expressions {#braced-expressions}

> Braced expressions, `{}`, define the most important hierarchy of R code, allowing you to group multiple R expressions together into a single expression. The most common places to use braced expressions are in function definitions, control flow, and function calls (such as `tryCatch()` or `test_that()` blocks).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Braced expressions, `{}`, define the most important hierarchy of R code, allowing you to group multiple R expressions together into a single expression. The most common places to use braced expressions are in function definitions, control flow, and in certain function calls (e.g `tryCatch()` and `test_that()`).
```

> ### Code blocks {#indenting}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Braced expressions {#indenting}
```

> Braced expressions, `{}`, define the most important hierarchy of R code. To make this

Reviewer 2: Maybe needs a bit more context — like you can use a braced expression whereever you can use a single expression, but the most common places to use them are in function calls, if statements, and for/while/repeat loops

* `}` should be the first character on the line.

> It is occassionally useful to have empty braced expressions, in which case it should be written `{}`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is occassionally useful to have an empty braced expression, in which case it should be written `{}`. For example, if you need a function that doesn't do anything, you can write `function(...) {}`.
```

Reviewer 3: I think this conflicts a bit with the native lambda advice, I would use "you can write `\(...) {}`"

https://style.tidyverse.org/functions.html#anonymous-functions

Reviewer: This example is clearer with `function` than `\` though. The function that doesn't do anything isn't necessarily anonymous, for instance a function stub at top level of a package (to be overwritten in `.onLoad`).

> It is occassionally useful to have empty braced expressions, in which case it should be written `{}`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is occasionally useful to have empty braced expressions, in which case it should be written `{}`.
```

> ### If statements

Reviewer 2: Maybe call this control flow and include a couple of for/while examples?

* A single line if statement must never contain braced expressions. You can use
  single line if statements for very simple statements that don't have
  side-effects and don't modify the control flow.

  ```{r}
  # Good
  message <- if (x > 10) "big" else "small"

  # Bad
  message <- if (x > 10) { "big" } else { "small" }
  ```

* A multiline if statement must contain braced expressions.

  ```{r}
  # Good
  if (x > 10) {
    x * 2
  }

  if (x > 10) {
    x * 2
  } else {
    x * 3
  }

  # Bad
  if (x > 10)
    x * 2

>   # In particular, the outer braces are required for this to even parse.

Reviewer 3: quibble, the outer part could be `()` too 😉

maybe "In particular, this will only parse inside a braced expression or call" ?

not totally happy with that, so feel free to leave as-is also.

  {
    if (x > 10)
      x * 2
    else
      x * 3
  }
  ```

* When present, `else` should be on the same line as `}`.

* `&` and `|` should never be used inside of an `if` clause because they can
  return vectors. Always use `&&` and `||` instead.

> * NB: `ifelse(x, a, b)` is not a drop-in replacement for `if (x) a else b`.

Reviewer 2: Might  be better to include this and the previous bullet in a `::: {.callout-note}` since they're more general programming advice than style?

  message("x is negative or zero")
    }
} else { y ^ x }
```

It is occasionally useful to have empty braced expressions, in which case it should be written `{}`, with no intervening space.

```{r}
# Good
function(...) {}

# Bad
function(...) { }
function(...) {

}
```

## Control flow

### Loops

R defines three types of looping constructs: `for`, `while`, and `repeat` loops.

* The body of a loop must be a braced expression.

  ```{r}
  # Good
  for (i in seq) {
    x[i] <- x[i] + 1
  }

  while (waiting_for_something()) {
    cat("Still waiting...")
  }

  # Bad
  for (i in seq) x[i] <- x[i] + 1

  while (waiting_for_something()) cat("Still waiting...")
  ```

* It is occasionally useful to use a `while` loop with an empty braced expression body to wait. As mentioned in [Braced expressions](#braced-expressions), there should be no space within the `{}`.

  ```{r}
  # Good
  while (waiting_for_something()) {}

  # Bad
  while (waiting_for_something()) { }
  while (waiting_for_something()) {

  }

>   ```

Reviewer 2: I think you can omit this example.

### If statements

* A single line if statement must never contain braced expressions. You can use
  single line if statements for very simple statements that don't have
  side-effects and don't modify the control flow.

  ```{r}
  # Good
  message <- if (x > 10) "big" else "small"

  # Bad

>   message <- if (x > 10) { "big" } else { "small" }

Reviewer 2: Maybe worth a bad example containing a returning? Or maybe an assignment?

```R
if (x > 0) message <- "big" else message <- "small"
```
